algorithmic trading has gained more and
more popularity over the past few years
due to high costs and complexity
algorithmic trading used to only be
available for institutional investors
and traders
but with every improving technology the
internet and online quantitative trading
platforms
the entry barrier for algorithmic
trading has never been lower
in this video we will examine the
differences between systematic
and discretionary trading as well as the
best way to get started with either
that said let's jump right into it first
and foremost let me just quickly clarify
what i mean by discretionary and
systematic trading
discretionary trading is a trading form
where you manually open and close your
trades
even though you might still have a
trading plan you usually rely on your
discretion
on when the best time to open or to
close a position is
systematic or rules-based trading on the
other hand is a trading form
where you have a clear system with exact
rules that tell you when
to buy or sell a given security system
traders
usually use algorithms to automatically
execute their trades
in this article we will focus on
algorithmic system trading
let me give you a simple example to show
you the differences in a systematic
versus discretionary trading approach
a discretionary and systematic trader
both want to buy a given stock
in case of an uptrend a systematic
trader would have a very specific set of
rules
such as the 200-day simple moving
average is below the 50-day simple
moving average for identifying an
uptrend
the discretionary trader on the other
hand would rely on their discretion
market awareness a variable set of
indicators intuition and their own
judgement to decide whether the
currently is an
uptrend or not sadly algorithmic trading
is often misunderstood in one of two
ways
the first misconception about
algorithmic trading is that it is too
good to be true
if you can just set and forget your
automated trading strategies why isn't
everyone doing it
here it is important to understand that
automate does not equal easy
researching developing testing and
optimizing algorithmic trading
strategies
takes a lot of time and effort by no
means can you expect to generate any
noteworthy returns with a strategy that
was developed in a few minutes
the next misunderstanding about
systematic versus discretionary trading
is that there is no way that an
algorithm could compare against a human
trader
due to rapid technology development this
has gotten better over
the past years but there still exists
many people with this algorithm aversion
even though algorithms might not think
like humans they can still be programmed
to solve incredibly complex tasks
much faster than any human ever could so
given the right code a trading bot can
certainly outperform a human trader
this is supported by the fact that a
very large percentage of the world's
largest hedge funds and banks
primarily rely on an algorithm-driven
trading approach
with that out of the way let's now start
breaking down the pros and cons of both
algorithmic and discretionary trading
here i firstly want to say that neither
systematic trading nor discretionary
trading
is inherently better than the other each
methodology
brings with it its own challenges and
benefits which we'll discuss
next in essence comparing systematic
versus discretionary trading
comes down to comparing man and machine
systematic strategies take advantage of
the insane speed at which computers can
analyze data
and make decisions based on this data
discretionary strategies on the other
hand
benefit from human intuition and all
around intelligence
that being said let's start by breaking
down the advantages of systematic
trading
first and foremost an algorithmic
approach to trading is very different
from a discretionary one
you can't just open a broker and
immediately start trading
you first have to code your algorithm
test analyze and optimize it before you
actually start risking any significant
amount of money
these steps require sufficient
understanding of a programming language
how to handle data and market structure
this means there are many more hurdles
between an idea and an actual trade for
an algorithmic trader
even though this can be seen as a
disadvantage i see it more as an
advantage
one of the main reasons why so many
discretionary traders lose money
is that they have no idea what they're
doing they might have watched a few
trading tutorials on youtube and then
decided to open a broker account
sadly this usually is not enough to
become a consistently profitable trader
so summed up algorithmic trading has a
higher entry barrier which puts a few
more hurdles between you
and you making stupid trades note that
this does not mean that you can't create
bad trading algorithms
but generally speaking an algorithmic
trader has to put much more thought
into every aspect of their trading
strategy since they actually have to
code it out
a discretionary trader on the other hand
can just mindlessly start buying and
selling random securities if they want
to
i know this entry barrier might seem
off-putting and overwhelming for some
people
but with the internet and the
availability of so many great free
resources it has never been easier to
learn how to code and get into
algorithmic trading
you don't even need to buy your own data
or build your own trading engine due to
the rise of so many great algorithmic
trading platforms
all you have to do nowadays is learn the
api of an algorithmic trading platform
and you're good to go
for a list of some great algorithmic
trading platforms check out my article
on the best algorithmic trading
platforms
there's a link in the description box
below
besides that another big advantage of
systematic trading strategies
is that they can be back tested this
means that you can actually analyze
their historical performance
before risking a dime this is something
you simply can't do with the
discretionary trading strategy
for discretionary strategies it is very
hard to evaluate their performance
without actually having traded them for
a long enough period of time
furthermore systematic strategies are
much more consistent and mechanical
since they aren't influenced by human
emotions
in my opinion the biggest problem with
discretionary trading strategies is that
emotions and subjectivity can get into
the way
if you are confronted with the exact
same situation more than once
you might not always make the same
decision this cannot be said for an
algorithmic approach
this lack of consistency is another
reason why it can be very hard
to reliably evaluate a discretionary
trading strategy
in general well-developed systematic
trading strategies
tend to have more rigorous risk
management models especially when
confronted with losses
humans tend to be very emotional which
can make it hard to cut a loss
second guessing a trading decision can
cost you valuable time and money
a trading algorithm would immediately
close a position as soon as the correct
criteria are met
in addition to that since systematic
strategies usually are automated
you won't have to spend hours in front
of the screen monitoring and scanning
the markets
for potential trading opportunities once
the trading algorithm is implemented and
tested
you won't have to spend nearly as much
time monitoring it as a discretionary
trader would have spent monitoring the
markets
last but not least from my own
experience i can say that the
discretionary trading community is
filled with
fake trading gurus and marketers that
spread so much false or just bad
information
while trying to sell you their products
actually finding sound and valuable
trading related education
can be a real hassle especially when
you're just starting out and can't yet
evaluate
which information is good i have
personally not found nearly as many
shady marketers and
as much bad information in the world of
algorithmic trading
i suspect that this has to do with the
higher entry barrier which limits the
potential target audience for these
sketchy marketers
next up let's discuss the advantages of
a discretionary trading approach
a trading bot will do exactly what you
tell it to do not more
not less while an algorithm runs it
neither feels nor things the way a human
would
even though a lack of emotions usually
is a good thing when making decisions
a lack of deeper understanding of the
underlying problem can be a bad thing
a human could take previously unknown
information into account which the bot
just couldn't
the bot only considers what it has been
programmed to consider
it can't use its intuition or intellect
to take new information into account
a bot only considers the date it was
given this can sometimes lead to
obviously bad traits that no human
trader would ever make
humans excel at all around intelligent
whereas bots usually excel
at one specialized thing such as
analyzing and evaluating vast amounts of
data within milliseconds or even less
depending on the situation either one of
these skills can be better
it is possible to create dynamic trading
algorithms but generally speaking
it is easier for a discretionary trader
to adapt to new situations
than for a trading algorithm to adapt
its strategy
some experienced traders sometimes even
make some of their trading decisions
on a subconscious level based on the
available information and their
experience
last but not least discretionary trading
is much easier to get into
since all you need is a funded brokerage
account and you're ready to go
but like i said earlier this ease of
access can be a double-edged sword
since many beginners immediately start
risking their hard-earned money without
actually having a clear trading strategy
or a deep enough understanding of the
markets
to make any informed trades
in conclusion systematic and
discretionary trading have their
differences
and the similarities but in the end i
wouldn't claim that one is inherently
better than the other
in fact research from the hedge fund aqr
capital shows
that there is little evidence that one
approach is better than the other
when comparing discretionary and
systematic fund managers performance
this finding is supported by other
research in this area as well
depending on the trade you and the
strategy both can significantly
underperform
or outperform their respective
benchmarks this is supported by the
myriad examples
of highly successful discretionary and
systematic traders
a good discretionary trader can easily
outperform a poorly developed trading
algorithm
but so can a good systematic trader if
you're asking yourself
which approach you want to adopt for
your own trading you should ask yourself
which skill set fits you best
if you're good at handling your emotions
staying cool in stressful situations
at manually identifying price trends
discretionary trading might be the best
approach for you
if on the other hand you struggle with
your emotions while trading and prefer a
more scientific
data-driven rules-based approach
systematic trading might be the best
choice for you
that said it is also possible to combine
the two approaches
you could for instance use a trading
algorithm to create buy or sell
recommendations
and then decide at your own discretion
whether to follow them and how to do so
but even if you prefer discretionary
trading i still recommend systematizing
your trading to some extent
you don't need to code your own trading
algorithms and automate everything
but you should still have a general set
of rules to follow as well as a clear
trading plan
and consistent approach especially when
you're just starting out this is very
important
you should always seek to improve your
trading and in my opinion the best way
to do so
is by identifying your own strengths and
weaknesses by doing this you can focus
on your strengths and work on your
weaknesses
the best way to improve your trading is
by consistently tracking your trades and
analyzing your trading data
if you want to learn how to best
possibly do this make sure to check out
my guide on the best trading journal
software
there's a link in the description box
below
if you're just starting out make sure to
first focus on educating yourself as
much as possible before risking any
significant amount of money
you can't expect to become a profitable
trader of any kind without putting in
the time and effort
if you want to get started with
algorithmic trading definitely make sure
to check out my algorithmic trading
video playlist
otherwise i really hope you enjoyed this
video and learned something new
if you did make sure to smash the like
button subscribe to my channel and turn
on the notification bell for more
content like this
thanks for watching